---
fileClass: Base, Literature Notes
title: 
Parents: ["[[Coastal Oceanography and Delta Geology]]"]
Draft: 
Status: In Progress
Authors: 
Year of Publication: 
Related Notes: 
Related Terminology: 
Related Courses: ["[[Coastal Oceanography and Delta Geology]]"]
---
# 1.1 What is a Delta?
The term [[Delta]] refers to the roughly triangular shape of the land enclosed by two river branches and the coastline, which resembles the Greek letter $\Delta$. The origin of such a piece of coastal land is a subject of study for geologists and geomorphologists.

Key to this origin is the fact that where a river debouches into a sea or lake, the sediments carried by the river are deposited near the mouth, because of the more or less sudden reduction of the ability of the flow to carry sediments. Over time, a particularly submerged, seaward growing sediment body is formed near the river mouth. Starting from this depositional process, geologists and geomorphologists have a slightly different focus when studying the delta phenomenon

In the geological sense, the sediment body, of which only a relatively small portion is visible at the surface, is called a delta. Thus, geological delta studies place emphasis on three-dimensional characteristics, such as variations in grain size of the deposits, their stratigraphy and possible (tectonic) deformations. Delta sediment bodies are also called coastal prisms: wedge-formed sediment bodies (when viewed in a cross-section perpendicular to the coastline) formed on a sloping surface near sea (or lake) level. 

Geomorphologically, a delta is considered as a landform, thereby excluding the deep subsurface and far offshore parts of the delta sediment body. In the geomorphological sense a delta can be considered as a part of the coastal plain formed under influence of rivers meeting the sea or lake. This plain is formed by fluvial deposition, but also by near-shore redistribution of sediments supplied by the river under influence of marine or lacustrine and eolian processes. A geomorphological definition of deltas can be based on the existence of multiple active and abandoned distributary river channels on the delta plain. On a natural delta plain the river is not confined by valley slopes (or embankments) and will change its course from time to time, with new distributaries creating new delta lobes on the coastline. In the process of switching, which is called [[Avulsion]], multiple active distributaries may coexist for some time, although often delta river discharge is captured by one dominant channel, leaving the earlier channel as a remnant on the delta plain. 

>[!Important]
>Because of this typical deltaic process of channel switching, deltas can be defined geomorphologically to include the radial complex of active and abandoned distributary channels with associated fluvial landforms and the enclosed portions of the coastal plain, which forms where a river meets the sea or a lake. 

Defined as such, neighbouring parts of the coastal plain without landforms created by the delta river are excluded from the delta, as well as offshore areas and uplands that are above present river flood levels. 

>[!Important]
>The most landward point of the delta (the apex) is defined by the most upstream occurrence of (abandoned) distributaries splitting from the main channel without rejoining it downstream. Often this is the point where the river leaves a more or less confined valley setting. 

Because this course is about the deltaic environment as a space for human activities, we will focus on the geomorphological aspects of deltas, and therefore the geomorphological definition above will be used as an anchor point. However, for full understanding of delta geomorphology, geological knowledge remains indispensable, and therefore in the next sections we will discuss the geological framework of delta formation. For the same reason, in this course we will also pay attention to the delta-building processes in the shallow offshore zone, i.e. outside the geomorphological delta proper, because they help us understand geomorphological characteristics. Although deltas can form in both seas and lakes, in this course the case of lake deltas will not be addressed. 

It is important to realize that deltas are the ultimate product of hydraulic forces moving sediment particles from one place to another. These hydraulic forces, which are generated by fluvial, tidal and wave processes, will be addressed in depth in the hydrological part of this course. The three main categories of delta-forming forces also serve as a basis for distinguishing geomorphological delta types that we will expand upon after having outlined the geological context of delta formation

---
# 1.2 The Geological Setting of Deltas
Deltas usually build out on a relatively flat and shallow part of the seafloor, called the **continental shelf**. A wide continental shelf means that deltas can, relatively rapidly, grow seaward for a considerable distance. When approaching the deeper waters near the shelf edge, seaward extension of a delta slows down because the volume of sediments needed for subaerial delta growth then strongly increases.

What is needed for a large delta to form?
1. *A large river system delivering a lot of sediment*: Such river systems usually have a large catchment and drain major parts of the continent. Obviously, large rivers also require high precipitation over the catchment, which is especially the case in (monsoonal) tropical climates. Additionally, sediment production in the catchment is strongly enhanced if the catchment has a high relief with strong mechanical weathering in large high altitude areas. Also tectonic activity may contribute to high sediment production. Given these factors, it cannot be a surprise that the largest delta in the world is the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta. This delta is formed by mega-rivers that drain the tectonically active Himalayas. Moreover, the catchment is subjected to very high precipitation in a tropical monsoonal climate
2. *A shallow sea, i.e. a wide continental shelf*: Deltas form on the margins of continents. These margins can be either geologically active or passive. Active continental margins are characterized by deep-sea troughs where seafloor (oceanic plate) dips under the continent (continental plate) in a process called **subduction**. In this situation the bottom of the sea slopes steeply from the coast to the deep sea and there is no substantial continental shelf that can host a large delta. Passive continental margins, on the other hand, are characterized by a (wide) continental shelf, which actually is the submerged part of the continent, and absence of a subduction zone. Large deltas tend to form in tectonic lows (e.g. graben structures) of the continental shelves along passive continental margins. An example of a large delta formed in such a setting is the Niger delta

>[!Missing]
>Insert image 1.4

Of course, not all deltas form in the ideal geological setting outlined above. Deltas form in any place where a river carrying sediment enters a standing body of water. Many, often relatively small, deltas fill up bays and drowned valleys, and do not form as a part of a coastal plain. In that case, the typical delta shape is less developed. An example of a small delta in a less typical setting is the Sacramento-San Joaquin delta that has formed in San Francisco Bay on an active continental margin. 

>[!Summary]
>Factors promoting delta formation
>1. Much sediment deposition
>   - Large river with large catchment area
>   - Much precipitation (especially the case in monsoonal tropical climates)
>   - Much mechanical weathering due to high elevation
>   - High tectonic activity
>2. Shallow sea / wide continental shelf

---
# 1.3 Delta Types
The geomorphology of deltas is largely determined by which of the three main delta-forming forces dominates: (1) river input, (2) wave energy, or (3) tidal energy. Deltas can be plotted in a triangle diagram, in which the extreme corners represent strong dominance of one of these three forces. It should be remembered, however, that most deltas take an intermediate position in this diagram, with two or three of the mentioned forces influencing delta morphology

>[!Missing]
>Insert Figure 1.5

River-dominated deltas form where large rivers carrying much sediment debouch into a sea with very little wave and tidal activity. These deltas protrude into the sea strongly, with distributaries building narrow, sometimes branching lobes. The birdfoot-shaped Mississippi delta is a classic example of this delta type

Deltas that are subject to high wave energy, while the tidal range is limited, are called wave-dominated deltas. These deltas are characterized by a smooth coastline modelled by strong longshore drift of sediment and extend not far into the sea. Beach ridges are very well developed in this type of delta. The Rhone and Senegal deltas are examples of this delta type

Tide-dominated deltas form under influence of strong tidal currents, while wave-energy is limited. These deltas usually have very irregular shorelines with many river mouths and tidal creeks. River mouths of these deltas are wide and funnel-shaped estuaries due to scour by tidal currents. The Irrawaddy and Ganges-Brahmaputra deltas are examples of this delta type

While this tripartite division of deltas provides a useful framework for analysing delta geomorphology, it has been argued that at least one important factor is not included in this approach. The grain size of the sediments supplied to the delta determines the delta morphology in a number of ways:
1. It influences the gradient of the delta plain and the river channel pattern;
2. It influences the mixing behaviour of the sediment when it enters the sea;
3. It influences the type of shoreline and its response to wave and tidal energy, and;
4. It influences deformation and resedimentation processes on the subaqueous delta front. 

For these reasons, grain size should be added as a fourth axis to the triangle diagram above to enable a more comprehensive classification. 

>[!Missing]
>Insert Figure 1.6


---
# 1.4 The Sedimentary Architecture of Deltas
## 1.4.1 General Stratigraphy
A simple ('ideal') delta sediment body id composed of three types of beds. When viewed in a cross-section perpendicular to the coastline one can distinguish in an upward direction: (1) bottomset or toeset beds, (2) foreset or frontset beds, and (3) topset beds

>[!Missing]
>Insert Figure 1.7

The bottomset beds are slightly included seaward and consist of fine material (clay and silt) that has been deposited in deep water in front of the larger part of the delta body from suspension during floods. This material has been transported by sediment gravity flows (turbidity currents) along the sea bottom. 

The foreset beds are much steeper inclined seaward and consist of coarser material than the bottomset beds. These parallel beds are typically straight and have very uniform slopes. They mainly consist of sand-sized material that has been transported to the deltafront as bedload. Once reaching the edge of the deltafront the particles will roll down the steeper deltafront, building beds at the angle of repose. From time to time, if beds steepen a little by natural sedimentation processes the deltafront becomes unstable and landslides occur that adjust the overall slope again to the angle of repose. 

The topset beds are near-horizontal beds that cover the foreset beds. The topset beds are essentially deposited by river floods and predominantly consist of rather fine material, because of the low gradient of the rivers on the delta plain. Farther away from the river channels, the topset beds are clayey floodbasin deposits deposited from suspension during floods. The foreset bed may be eroded by river channels that fill up with sandy bedload material. In the upper delta plain topset beds are formed by purely fluvial processes. In the lower delta plain there may be significant tidal influence on the development of topset beds

The delta grows by advance (progradation) of the steep deltafront. In this process, bottomset beds are buried under foreset beds, which facilitates seaward extension of the delta plain by deposition of topset beds on the foreset beds. The vertical sequence that develops by delta progradation is a coarsening upward sequence in the bottomset and foreset deposits, which may be followed by a fining upward sequence in the fluvial topset deposits. Delta growth (progradation) can be classifies as a regression, i.e. a seaward shift of the shoreline. The delta sequence of bottomset, foreset and topset deposits can therefore also be classified as a regressive sequence.

The delta sequence outlined above can also be recognised in many modern delta sediment bodies as well as in ancient sedimentary basins, where it can be used to reconstruct former coastlines. It is important to remember, however, that this sequence is not always completely developed in delta sediment bodies. Full development of bottomset and foreset deposits needs a sufficient water depth in the marine basin. In the ase of the Holocene Rhine-Meuse delta, for example, only topset beds have been formed upon drowning of a terraced Pleistocene fluvial surface.  